Everybody writes. Especially in academia. Students write and professors
write. And nonfiction writers, who are the third group of people this book is
aiming to help, obviously write as well. And writing doesn’t necessarily
mean papers, articles or books, but everyday, basic writing. We write when
we need to remember something, be it an idea, a quote or the outcome of a
study. We write when we want to organise our thoughts and when we want to
exchange ideas with others. Students write when they take an exam, but the
first thing they do to prepare even for an oral examination is to grab pen and
paper. We write down not only those things we fear we won’t remember
otherwise, but also the very things we try to memorise. Every intellectual
endeavour starts with a note.
Writing plays such a central role in learning, studying and research that it
is surprising how little we think about it. If writing is discussed, the focus lies
almost always on the few exceptional moments where we write a lengthy
piece, a book, an article or, as students, the essays and theses we have to hand
in. At first glance, that makes sense: these are the tasks that cause the most
anxiety and with which we struggle the longest. Consequently, these “written
pieces” are also what most self-help books for academics or study guides
focus on, but very few give guidance for the everyday note-taking that takes
up the biggest chunk of our writing.
The available books fall roughly into two categories. The first teaches the
formal requirements: style, structure or how to quote correctly. And then
there are the psychological ones, which teach you how to get it done without
mental breakdowns and before your supervisor or publisher starts refusing to
move the deadline once more. What they all have in common, though, is that
they start with a blank screen or sheet of paper.
[1] But by doing this, they
ignore the main part, namely note-taking, failing to understand that
improving the organisation of all writing makes a difference. They seem to
forget that the process of writing starts much, much earlier than that blank
screen and that the actual writing down of the argument is the smallest part of
its development. This book aims to fill this gap by showing you how to
